# DRUG: Atorvastatin

## Identification
- Generic Name: ATORVASTATIN CALCIUM
- Brand Names: Atorvastatin calcium
- Manufacturer: Bryant Ranch Prepack
- Route: ORAL

## Indications and Usage
- 1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE Atorvastatin calcium tablets are indicated: To reduce the risk of: Myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, revascularization procedures, and angina in adults with multiple risk factors for coronary heart disease (CHD) but without clinically evident CHD MI and stroke in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus with multiple risk factors for CHD but without clinically evident CHD Non-fatal MI, fatal and non-fatal stroke, revascularization procedures, hospitalization for congestive heart failure, and angina in adults with clinically evident CHD As an adjunct to diet to reduce low-density lipoprotein cholesterol (LDL-C) in: Adults with primary hyperlipidemia. Adults and pediatric patients aged 10 years and older with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH). As an adjunct to other LDL-C-lowering therapies, or alone if such treatments are unavailable, to reduce LDL-C in adults and pediatric patients aged 10 years and older with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HoFH). As an adjunct to diet for the treatment of adults with: Primary dysbetalipoproteinemia Hypertriglyceridemia Atorvastatin calcium tablets are an HMG-CoA reductase inhibitor (statin) indicated ( 1 ): To reduce the risk of: Myocardial infarction (MI), stroke, revascularization procedures, and angina in adults with multiple risk factors for coronary heart disease (CHD) but without clinically evident CHD. MI and stroke in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus with multiple risk factors for CHD but without clinically evident CHD. Non-fatal MI, fatal and non-fatal stroke, revascularization procedures, hospitalization for congestive heart failure, and angina in adults with clinically evident CHD. As an adjunct to diet to reduce low-density lipoprotein (LDL-C) in: Adults with primary hyperlipidemia. Adults and pediatric patients aged 10 years and older with heterozygous familial hypercholesterolemia (HeFH). As an adjunct to other LDL-C-lowering therapies to reduce LDL-C in adults and pediatric patients aged 10 years and older with homozygous familial hypercholesterolemia. As an adjunct to diet for the treatment of adults with: Primary dysbetaliproteinemia. Hypertriglyceridemia.

## Dosage and Administration
- 2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Take orally once daily with or without food ( 2.1 ). Assess LDL-C when clinically appropriate, as early as 4 weeks after initiating atorvastatin calcium tablets, and adjust dosage if necessary ( 2.1 ). Adults ( 2.2 ): Recommended starting dosage is 10 or 20 mg once daily; dosage range is 10 mg to 80 mg once daily. Patients requiring LDL-C reduction >45% may start at 40 mg once daily. Pediatric Patients Aged 10 Years of Age and Older with HeFH: Recommended starting dosage is 10 mg once daily; dosage range is 10 to 20 mg once daily ( 2.3 ). Pediatric Patients Aged 10 Years of Age and Older with HoFH: Recommended starting dosage is 10 to 20 mg once daily; dosage range is 10 to 80 mg once daily ( 2.4 ). See full prescribing information for atorvastatin calcium tablets dosage modifications due to drug interactions ( 2.5 ). 2.1 Important Dosage Information Take atorvastatin calcium tablets orally once daily at any time of the day, with or without food. Assess LDL-C when clinically appropriate, as early as 4 weeks after initiating atorvastatin calcium tablets, and adjust the dosage if necessary. 2.2 Recommended Dosage in Adult Patients The recommended starting dosage of atorvastatin calcium tablets are 10 mg to 20 mg once daily. The dosage range is 10 mg to 80 mg once daily. Patients who require reduction in LDL-C greater than 45% may be started at 40 mg once daily. 2.3 Recommended Dosage in Pediatric Patients 10 Years of Age and Older with HeFH The recommended starting dosage of atorvastatin calcium tablets are 10 mg once daily. The dosage range is 10 mg to 20 mg once daily. 2.4 Recommended Dosage in Pediatric Patients 10 Years of Age and Older with HoFH The recommended starting dosage of atorvastatin calcium tablets are 10 mg to 20 mg once daily. The dosage range is 10 mg to 80 mg once daily. 2.5 Dosage Modifications Due to Drug Interactions Concomitant use of atorvastatin calcium tablets with the following drugs requires dosage modification of atorvastatin calcium tablets [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Drug Interactions (7.1) ]. Anti-Viral Medications In patients taking saquinavir plus ritonavir, darunavir plus ritonavir, fosamprenavir, fosamprenavir plus ritonavir, elbasvir plus grazoprevir or letermovir, do not exceed atorvastatin calcium tablets 20 mg once daily. In patients taking nelfinavir, do not exceed atorvastatin calcium tablets 40 mg once daily. Select Azole Antifungals or Macrolide Antibiotics In patients taking clarithromycin or itraconazole, do not exceed atorvastatin calcium tablets 20 mg once daily. For additional recommendations regarding concomitant use of atorvastatin calcium tablets with other anti-viral medications, azole antifungals or macrolide antibiotics, see Drug Interactions (7.1).

## Dosage Forms and Strengths
- 3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS Atorvastatin calcium tablets, USP: 10 mg of atorvastatin: white coloured, oval shaped, biconvex, film-coated tablets with “MA” on one side and “1” on other side. 20 mg of atorvastatin: white coloured, oval shaped, biconvex, film-coated tablets with “MA” on one side and “2” on other side. 40 mg of atorvastatin: white coloured, oval shaped, biconvex, film-coated tablets with “MA” on one side and “3” on other side. 80 mg of atorvastatin: white coloured, oval shaped, biconvex, film-coated tablets with “MA” on one side and “4” on other side. Tablets: 10 mg; 20 mg; 40 mg; 80 mg of atorvastatin ( 3 ).

## Contraindications
- 4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Acute liver failure or decompensated cirrhosis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ] Hypersensitivity to atorvastatin or any excipients in atorvastatin calcium. Hypersensitivity reactions, including anaphylaxis, angioneurotic edema, erythema multiforme, Stevens-Johnson syndrome, and toxic epidermal necrolysis, have been reported [see Adverse Reactions (6.2) ]. Acute liver failure or decompensated cirrhosis ( 4 ). Hypersensitivity to atorvastatin or any excipient in atorvastatin calcium ( 4 ).

## Adverse Reactions
- 6 ADVERSE REACTIONS The following important adverse reactions are described below and elsewhere in the labeling: Myopathy and Rhabdomyolysis [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) ] Immune-Mediated Necrotizing Myopathy [see Warnings and Precautions (5.2) ] Hepatic Dysfunction [see Warnings and Precautions (5.3) ] Increases in HbA1c and Fasting Serum Glucose Levels [see Warnings and Precautions (5.4) ] Most common adverse reactions (incidence ≥5%) are nasopharyngitis, arthralgia, diarrhea, pain in extremity, and urinary tract infection ( 6.1 ). To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Novadoz Pharmaceuticals LLC at 1-855-668-2369 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Trials Experience Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, the adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. In the atorvastatin calcium placebo-controlled clinical trial database of 16,066 patients (8755 atorvastatin calcium vs. 7311 placebo; age range 10 to 93 years, 39% women, 91% White, 3% Black, 2% Asian, 4% other) with a median treatment duration of 53 weeks, the most common adverse reactions in patients treated with atorvastatin calcium that led to treatment discontinuation and occurred at a rate greater than placebo were: myalgia (0.7%), diarrhea (0.5%), nausea (0.4%), alanine aminotransferase increase (0.4%), and hepatic enzyme increase (0.4%). Table 1 summarizes adverse reactions reported in ≥ 2% and at a rate greater than placebo in patients treated with atorvastatin calcium (n=8755), from seventeen placebo-controlled trials. Table 1: Adverse Reactions Occurring in ≥ 2% in Patients Atorvastatin Calcium- Treated with any Dose and Greater than Placebo Adverse Reaction % Placebo N=7311 % 10 mg N=3908 % 20 mg N=188 % 40 mg N=604 % 80 mg N=4055 % Any dose N=8755 Nasopharyngitis 8.2 12.9 5.3 7.0 4.2 8.3 Arthralgia 6.5 8.9 11.7 10.6 4.3 6.9 Diarrhea 6.3 7.3 6.4 14.1 5.2 6.8 Pain in extremity 5.9 8.5 3.7 9.3 3.1 6.0 Urinary tract infection 5.6 6.9 6.4 8.0 4.1 5.7 Dyspepsia 4.3 5.9 3.2 6.0 3.3 4.7 Nausea 3.5 3.7 3.7 7.1 3.8 4.0 Musculoskeletal pain 3.6 5.2 3.2 5.1 2.3 3.8 Muscle spasms 3.0 4.6 4.8 5.1 2.4 3.6 Myalgia 3.1 3.6 5.9 8.4 2.7 3.5 Insomnia 2.9 2.8 1.1 5.3 2.8 3.0 Pharyngolaryngeal pain 2.1 3.9 1.6 2.8 0.7 2.3 Other adverse reactions reported in placebo-controlled trials include: Body as a whole: malaise, pyrexia Digestive system: abdominal discomfort, eructation, flatulence, hepatitis, cholestasis Musculoskeletal system: musculoskeletal pain, muscle fatigue, neck pain, joint swelling Metabolic and nutritional system: transaminases increase, liver function test abnormal, blood alkaline phosphatase increase, creatine phosphokinase increase, hyperglycemia Nervous system: nightmare Respiratory system: epistaxis Skin and appendages: urticaria Special senses: vision blurred, ti
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Drug Interactions
- 7 DRUG INTERACTIONS See full prescribing information for details regarding concomitant use of atorvastatin calcium with other drugs or grapefruit juice that increase the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis ( 2.5 , 7.1 ). Rifampin: May reduce atorvastatin plasma concentrations. Administer simultaneously with atorvastatin calcium ( 7.2 ). Oral Contraceptives: May increase plasma levels of norethindrone and ethinyl estradiol; consider this effect when selecting an oral contraceptive (7.3 ). Digoxin: May increase digoxin plasma levels; monitor patients appropriately ( 7.3 ). 7.1 Drug Interactions that may Increase the Risk of Myopathy and Rhabdomyolysis with Atorvastatin Calcium Atorvastatin is a substrate of CYP3A4 and transporters (e.g., OATP1B1/1B3, P-gp, or BCRP). Atorvastatin plasma levels can be significantly increased with concomitant administration of inhibitors of CYP3A4 and transporters. Table 2 includes a list of drugs that may increase exposure to atorvastatin and may increase the risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis when used concomitantly and instructions for preventing or managing them [see Warnings and Precautions (5.1) and Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ]. Table 2: Drug Interactions that may Increase the Risk of Myopathy and Rhabdomyolysis with Atorvastatin Cyclosporine or Gemfibrozil Clinical Impact: Atorvastatin plasma levels were significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin and cyclosporine, an inhibitor of CYP3A4 and OATP1B1 [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ]. Gemfibrozil may cause myopathy when given alone. The risk of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis is increased with concomitant use of cyclosporine or gemfibrozil with atorvastatin. Intervention: Concomitant use of cyclosporine or gemfibrozil with atorvastatin is not recommended. Anti-Viral Medications Clinical Impact: Atorvastatin plasma levels were significantly increased with concomitant administration of atorvastatin with many anti-viral medications, which are inhibitors of CYP3A4 and/or transporters (e.g., BCRP, OATP1B1/1B3, P-gp, MRP2, and/or OAT2) [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.3) ]. Cases of myopathy and rhabdomyolysis have been reported with concomitant use of ledipasvir plus sofosbuvir with atorvastatin. Intervention: Concomitant use of tipranavir plus ritonavir or glecaprevir plus pibrentasvir with atorvastatin is not recommended. In patients taking lopinavir plus ritonavir, or simeprevir, consider the risk/benefit of concomitant use with atorvastatin. In patients taking saquinavir plus ritonavir, darunavir plus ritonavir, fosamprenavir, fosamprenavir plus ritonavir, elbasvir plus grazoprevir or letermovir, do not exceed atorvastatin 20 mg. In patients taking nelfinavir, do not exceed atorvastatin 40 mg [see Dosage and Administration (2.5) ]. Consider the risk/benefit of concomitant use of ledipasvir plus sofosbuvir with atorvastatin. Monitor all patients for signs and symptoms of myopathy particularly during initiation of therapy and during upwar
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Use in Specific Populations
- 8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS Pregnancy: May cause fetal harm. ( 8.1 ). Lactation: Breastfeeding not recommended during treatment with atorvastatin calcium ( 8.2 ). 8.1 Pregnancy Risk Summary Discontinue atorvastatin when pregnancy is recognized. Alternatively, consider the ongoing therapeutic needs of the individual patient. atorvastatin decreases synthesis of cholesterol and possibly other biologically active substances derived from cholesterol; therefore, atorvastatin may cause fetal harm when administered to pregnant patients based on the mechanism of action [see Clinical Pharmacology (12.1) ] . In addition, treatment of hyperlipidemia is not generally necessary during pregnancy. Atherosclerosis is a chronic process and the discontinuation of lipid-lowering drugs during pregnancy should have little impact on the outcome of long-term therapy of primary hyperlipidemia for most patients. Available data from case series and prospective and retrospective observational cohort studies over decades of use with statins in pregnant women have not identified a drug-associated risk of major congenital malformations. Published data from prospective and retrospective observational cohort studies with atorvastatin use in pregnant women are insufficient to determine if there is a drug-associated risk of miscarriage (see Data) . In animal reproduction studies, no adverse developmental effects were observed in pregnant rats or rabbits orally administered atorvastatin at doses that resulted in up to 30 and 20 times, respectively, the human exposure at the maximum recommended human dose (MRHD) of 80 mg, based on body surface area (mg/m 2 ). In rats administered atorvastatin during gestation and lactation, decreased postnatal growth and development delay were observed at doses ≥ 6 times the MRHD (see Data). The estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage for the indicated population is unknown. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2 to 4% and 15 to 20%, respectively. Data Human Data A Medicaid cohort linkage study of 1152 statin-exposed pregnant women compared to 886,996 controls did not find a significant teratogenic effect from maternal use of statins in the first trimester of pregnancy, after adjusting for potential confounders – including maternal age, diabetes mellitus, hypertension, obesity, and alcohol and tobacco use – using propensity score-based methods. The relative risk of congenital malformations between the group with statin use and the group with no statin use in the first trimester was 1.07 (95% confidence interval 0.85 to 1.37) after controlling for confounders, particularly pre-existing diabetes mellitus. There were also no statistically significant increases in any of the organ-specific malformations assessed after accounting for confounders. In the majority of pregnancies, statin treatment was initiated prior to pregnanc
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Clinical Pharmacology
- 12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action Atorvastatin is a selective, competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme that converts 3-hydroxy-3-­methylglutaryl-coenzyme A to mevalonate, a precursor of sterols, including cholesterol. In animal models, atorvastatin calcium lowers plasma cholesterol and lipoprotein levels by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol synthesis in the liver and by increasing the number of hepatic LDL receptors on the cell surface to enhance uptake and catabolism of LDL; atorvastatin calcium also reduces LDL production and the number of LDL particles. 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Atorvastatin, as well as some of its metabolites, are pharmacologically active in humans. The liver is the primary site of action and the principal site of cholesterol synthesis and LDL clearance. Drug dosage, rather than systemic drug concentration, correlates better with LDL-C reduction. Individualization of drug dosage should be based on therapeutic response [see Dosage and Administration (2) ]. 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Absorption Atorvastatin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration; maximum plasma concentrations occur within 1 to 2 hours. Extent of absorption increases in proportion to atorvastatin dose. The absolute bioavailability of atorvastatin (parent drug) is approximately 14% and the systemic availability of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity is approximately 30%. The low systemic availability is attributed to presystemic clearance in gastrointestinal mucosa and/or hepatic first-pass metabolism. Although food decreases the rate and extent of drug absorption by approximately 25% and 9%, respectively, as assessed by Cmax and AUC, LDL-C reduction is similar whether atorvastatin is given with or without food. Plasma atorvastatin concentrations are lower (approximately 30% for Cmax and AUC) following evening drug administration compared with morning. However, LDL-C reduction is the same regardless of the time of day of drug administration . Distribution Mean volume of distribution of atorvastatin is approximately 381 liters. Atorvastatin is ≥98% bound to plasma proteins. A blood/plasma ratio of approximately 0.25 indicates poor drug penetration into red blood cells. Elimination Metabolism Atorvastatin is extensively metabolized to ortho- and parahydroxylated derivatives and various beta-oxidation products. In vitro inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase by ortho- and parahydroxylated metabolites is equivalent to that of atorvastatin. Approximately 70% of circulating inhibitory activity for HMG-CoA reductase is attributed to active metabolites. In vitro studies suggest the importance of atorvastatin metabolism by cytochrome P450 3A4, consistent with increased plasma concentrations of atorvastatin in humans following co-administration with erythromycin, a known inhibitor of this isozyme [see Drug Interactions (7.1)] . In animals, the ortho-hydroxy metabolite undergoes further glucuronidation. Excretion Atorvastatin
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Mechanism of Action
- 12.1 Mechanism of Action Atorvastatin is a selective, competitive inhibitor of HMG-CoA reductase, the rate-limiting enzyme that converts 3-hydroxy-3-­methylglutaryl-coenzyme A to mevalonate, a precursor of sterols, including cholesterol. In animal models, atorvastatin calcium lowers plasma cholesterol and lipoprotein levels by inhibiting HMG-CoA reductase and cholesterol synthesis in the liver and by increasing the number of hepatic LDL receptors on the cell surface to enhance uptake and catabolism of LDL; atorvastatin calcium also reduces LDL production and the number of LDL particles.

## Pharmacodynamics
- 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Atorvastatin, as well as some of its metabolites, are pharmacologically active in humans. The liver is the primary site of action and the principal site of cholesterol synthesis and LDL clearance. Drug dosage, rather than systemic drug concentration, correlates better with LDL-C reduction. Individualization of drug dosage should be based on therapeutic response [see Dosage and Administration (2) ].

## Pharmacokinetics
- 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Absorption Atorvastatin is rapidly absorbed after oral administration; maximum plasma concentrations occur within 1 to 2 hours. Extent of absorption increases in proportion to atorvastatin dose. The absolute bioavailability of atorvastatin (parent drug) is approximately 14% and the systemic availability of HMG-CoA reductase inhibitory activity is approximately 30%. The low systemic availability is attributed to presystemic clearance in gastrointestinal mucosa and/or hepatic first-pass metabolism. Although food decreases the rate and extent of drug absorption by approximately 25% and 9%, respectively, as assessed by Cmax and AUC, LDL-C reduction is similar whether atorvastatin is given with or without food. Plasma atorvastatin concentrations are lower (approximately 30% for Cmax and AUC) following evening drug administration compared with morning. However, LDL-C reduction is the same regardless of the time of day of drug administration . Distribution Mean volume of distribution of atorvastatin is approximately 381 liters. Atorvastatin is ≥98% bound to plasma proteins. A blood/plasma ratio of approximately 0.25 indicates poor drug penetration into red blood cells. Elimination Metabolism Atorvastatin is extensively metabolized to ortho- and parahydroxylated derivatives and various beta-oxidation products. In vitro inhibition of HMG-CoA reductase by ortho- and parahydroxylated metabolites is equivalent to that of atorvastatin. Approximately 70% of circulating inhibitory activity for HMG-CoA reductase is attributed to active metabolites. In vitro studies suggest the importance of atorvastatin metabolism by cytochrome P450 3A4, consistent with increased plasma concentrations of atorvastatin in humans following co-administration with erythromycin, a known inhibitor of this isozyme [see Drug Interactions (7.1)] . In animals, the ortho-hydroxy metabolite undergoes further glucuronidation. Excretion Atorvastatin and its metabolites are eliminated primarily in bile following hepatic and/or extra-hepatic metabolism; however, the drug does not appear to undergo enterohepatic recirculation. Mean plasma elimination half-life of atorvastatin in humans is approximately 14 hours, but the half-life of inhibitory activity for HMG-CoA reductase is 20 to 30 hours due to the contribution of active metabolites. Less than 2% of a dose of atorvastatin is recovered in urine following oral administration. Specific Populations Geriatric Plasma concentrations of atorvastatin are higher (approximately 40% for Cmax and 30% for AUC) in healthy elderly subjects (age ≥65 years) than in young adults. Pediatric Apparent oral clearance of atorvastatin in pediatric subjects appeared similar to that of adults when scaled allometrically by body weight as the body weight was the only significant covariate in atorvastatin population PK model with data including pediatric HeFH patients (ages 10 years to 17 years of age, n=29) in an open-label, 8-week study. Gender Pla
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Overdosage
- 10 OVERDOSAGE No specific antidotes for atorvastatin are known. Contact Poison Control (1-800-222-1222) for latest recommendations. Due to extensive drug binding to plasma proteins, hemodialysis is not expected to significantly enhance atorvastatin clearance.
