# DRUG: Lisinopril

## Identification
- Generic Name: LISINOPRIL AND HYDROCHLOROTHIAZIDE TABLETS
- Brand Names: Lisinopril and Hydrochlorothiazide
- Manufacturer: ST. MARY'S MEDICAL PARK PHARMACY
- Route: ORAL
- Pharmacological Class: Thiazide Diuretic [EPC]

## Indications and Usage
- INDICATIONS AND USAGE Lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets are indicated for the treatment of hypertension, to lower blood pressure. Lowering blood pressure lowers the risk of fatal and non-fatal cardiovascular events, primarily strokes and myocardial infarctions. These benefits have been seen in controlled trials of antihypertensive drugs from a wide variety of pharmacologic classes including lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide. Control of high blood pressure should be part of comprehensive cardiovascular risk management, including, as appropriate, lipid control, diabetes management, antithrombotic therapy, smoking cessation, exercise, and limited sodium intake. Many patients will require more than 1 drug to achieve blood pressure goals. For specific advice on goals and management, see published guidelines, such as those of the National High Blood Pressure Education Program’s Joint National Committee on Prevention, Detection, Evaluation, and Treatment of High Blood Pressure (JNC). Numerous antihypertensive drugs, from a variety of pharmacologic classes and with different mechanisms of action, have been shown in randomized controlled trials to reduce cardiovascular morbidity and mortality, and it can be concluded that it is blood pressure reduction, and not some other pharmacologic property of the drugs, that is largely responsible for those benefits. The largest and most consistent cardiovascular outcome benefit has been a reduction in the risk of stroke, but reductions in myocardial infarction and cardiovascular mortality also have been seen regularly. Elevated systolic or diastolic pressure causes increased cardiovascular risk, and the absolute risk increase per mmHg is greater at higher blood pressures, so that even modest reductions of severe hypertension can provide substantial benefit. Relative risk reduction from blood pressure reduction is similar across populations with varying absolute risk, so the absolute benefit is greater in patients who are at higher risk independent of their hypertension (for example, patients with diabetes or hyperlipidemia), and such patients would be expected to benefit from more aggressive treatment to a lower blood pressure goal. Some antihypertensive drugs have smaller blood pressure effects (as monotherapy) in black patients, and many antihypertensive drugs have additional approved indications and effects (e.g., on angina, heart failure, or diabetic kidney disease). These considerations may guide selection of therapy. These fixed-dose combinations are not indicated for initial therapy (see DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ). In using lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets, consideration should be given to the fact that an angiotensin-converting enzyme inhibitor, captopril, has caused agranulocytosis, particularly in patients with renal impairment or collagen vascular disease, and that available data are insufficient to show that lisinopril does not have a similar risk. (See WARNINGS .) In considering use
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Dosage and Administration
- DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Lisinopril monotherapy is an effective treatment of hypertension in once-daily doses of 10 mg to 80 mg, while hydrochlorothiazide monotherapy is effective in doses of 12.5 mg to 50 mg per day. In clinical trials of lisinopril/hydrochlorothiazide combination therapy using lisinopril doses of 10 mg to 80 mg and hydrochlorothiazide doses of 6.25 mg to 50 mg, the antihypertensive response rates generally increased with increasing dose of either component. The side effects (see WARNINGS ) of lisinopril are generally rare and apparently independent of dose; those of hydrochlorothiazide are a mixture of dose-dependent phenomena (primarily hypokalemia) and dose-independent phenomena (e.g., pancreatitis), the former much more common than the latter. Therapy with any combination of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide will be associated with both sets of dose-independent side effects, but addition of lisinopril in clinical trials blunted the hypokalemia normally seen with diuretics. To minimize dose-independent side effects, it is usually appropriate to begin combination therapy only after a patient has failed to achieve the desired effect with monotherapy. Dose Titration Guided by Clinical Effect A patient whose blood pressure is not adequately controlled with either lisinopril or hydrochlorothiazide monotherapy may be switched to lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 10-12.5 or lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-12.5. Further increases of either or both components could depend on clinical response. The hydrochlorothiazide dose should generally not be increased until 2-3 weeks have elapsed. Patients whose blood pressures are adequately controlled with 25 mg of daily hydrochlorothiazide, but who experience significant potassium loss with this regimen, may achieve similar or greater blood pressure control with less potassium loss if they are switched to lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 10-12.5. Dosage higher than lisinopril 80 mg and hydrochlorothiazide 50 mg should not be used. Replacement Therapy: The combination may be substituted for the titrated individual components. Use in Renal Impairment: The usual regimens of therapy with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets need not be adjusted as long as the patient's creatinine clearance is greater than 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 (serum creatinine approximately less than or equal to 3 mg/dL or 265 μmol/L). In patients with more severe renal impairment, loop diuretics are preferred to thiazides, so lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets are not recommended (see WARNINGS, Anaphylactoid reactions during membrane exposure ).

## Contraindications
- CONTRAINDICATIONS Lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets are contraindicated in patients who are hypersensitive to any component of this product and in patients with a history of angioedema related to previous treatment with an angiotensin converting enzyme inhibitor and in patients with hereditary or idiopathic angioedema. Because of the hydrochlorothiazide component, this product is contraindicated in patients with anuria or hypersensitivity to other sulfonamide-derived drugs. Lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets are contraindicated in combination with a neprilysin inhibitor (e.g., sacubitril). Do not administer lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets within 36 hours of switching to or from sacubitril/valsartan, a neprilysin inhibitor (see WARNINGS ). Do not coadminister aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with diabetes.

## Adverse Reactions
- ADVERSE REACTIONS Lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets have been evaluated for safety in 930 patients including 100 patients treated for 50 weeks or more. In clinical trials with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets no adverse experiences peculiar to this combination drug have been observed. Adverse experiences that have occurred have been limited to those that have been previously reported with lisinopril or hydrochlorothiazide. The most frequent clinical adverse experiences in controlled trials (including open label extensions) with any combination of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets were: dizziness (7.5%), headache (5.2%), cough (3.9%), fatigue (3.7%) and orthostatic effects (3.2%) all of which were more common than in placebo-treated patients. Generally, adverse experiences were mild and transient in nature; but see WARNINGS regarding angioedema and excessive hypotension or syncope. Discontinuation of therapy due to adverse effects was required in 4.4% of patients principally because of dizziness, cough, fatigue and muscle cramps. Adverse experiences occurring in greater than one percent of patients treated with lisinopril plus hydrochlorothiazide in controlled clinical trials are shown below. Percent of Patients in Controlled Studies Clinical adverse experiences occurring in 0.3% to 1.0% of patients in controlled trials included: Lisinopril-Hydrochlorothiazide (n=930) Incidence (discontinuation) Placebo (n=207) Incidence Dizziness 7.5 (0.8) 1.9 Headache 5.2 (0.3) 1.9 Cough 3.9 (0.6) 1.0 Fatigue 3.7 (0.4) 1.0 Orthostatic Effects 3.2 (0.1) 1.0 Diarrhea 2.5 (0.2) 2.4 Nausea 2.2 (0.1) 2.4 Upper Respiratory Infection 2.2 (0.0) 0.0 Muscle Cramps 2.0 (0.4) 0.5 Asthenia 1.8 (0.2) 1.0 Paresthesia 1.5 (0.1) 0.0 Hypotension 1.4 (0.3) 0.5 Vomiting 1.4 (0.1) 0.5 Dyspepsia 1.3 (0.0) 0.0 Rash 1.2 (0.1) 0.5 Impotence 1.2 (0.3) 0.0 Body as a Whole: Chest pain, abdominal pain, syncope, chest discomfort, fever, trauma, virus infection. Cardiovascular: Palpitation, orthostatic hypotension. Digestive: Gastrointestinal cramps, dry mouth, constipation, heartburn. Musculoskeletal: Back pain, shoulder pain, knee pain, back strain, myalgia, foot pain. Nervous/Psychiatric: Decreased libido, vertigo, depression, somnolence. Respiratory: Common cold, nasal congestion, influenza, bronchitis, pharyngeal pain, dyspnea, pulmonary congestion, chronic sinusitis, allergic rhinitis, pharyngeal discomfort. Skin: Flushing, pruritus, skin inflammation, diaphoresis. Special Senses: Blurred vision, tinnitus, otalgia. Urogenital: Urinary tract infection. Angioedema: Angioedema has been reported in patients receiving PRINZIDE, with an incidence higher in Black than in non-Black patients. Angioedema associated with laryngeal edema may be fatal. If angioedema of the face, extremities, lips, tongue, glottis and/or larynx occurs, treatment with PRINZIDE should be discontinued and appropriate therapy instituted immediately. In rare cases, intestinal angioedema has bee
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Drug Interactions
- Drug Interactions Lisinopril Hypotension - Patients on Diuretic Therapy: Patients on diuretics and especially those in whom diuretic therapy was recently instituted, may occasionally experience an excessive reduction of blood pressure after initiation of therapy with lisinopril. The possibility of hypotensive effects with lisinopril can be minimized by either discontinuing the diuretic or increasing the salt intake prior to initiation of treatment with lisinopril. If it is necessary to continue the diuretic, initiate therapy with lisinopril at a dose of 5 mg daily, and provide close medical supervision after the initial dose for at least two hours and until blood pressure has stabilized for at least an additional hour. (See WARNINGS , and DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION .) When a diuretic is added to the therapy of a patient receiving lisinopril, an additional antihypertensive effect is usually observed (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION .) Non-steroidal Anti-inflammatory Agents Including Selective Cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) Inhibitors: In patients who are elderly, volume-depleted (including those on diuretic therapy), or with compromised renal function, co-administration of NSAIDs, including selective COX-2 inhibitors, with ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may result in deterioration of renal function, including possible acute renal failure. These effects are usually reversible. Monitor renal function periodically in patients receiving lisinopril and NSAID therapy. The antihypertensive effect of ACE inhibitors, including lisinopril, may be attenuated by NSAIDs. Dual Blockade of the Renin-Angiotensin System (RAS): Dual blockade of the RAS with angiotensin receptor blockers, ACE inhibitors, or direct renin inhibitors (such as aliskiren) is associated with increased risk of hypotension, syncope, hyperkalemia, and changes in renal function (including acute renal failure) compared to monotherapy. The VA NEPHRON trial enrolled 1448 patients with type 2 diabetes, elevated urinary-albumin-to-creatinine ratio, and decreased estimated glomerular filtration rate (GFR 30 to 89.9 ml/min), randomized them to lisinopril or placebo on a background of losartan therapy and followed them for a median of 2.2 years. Patients receiving the combination of losartan and lisinopril did not obtain any additional benefit compared to monotherapy for the combined endpoint of decline in GFR, end state renal disease, or death, but experienced an increased incidence of hyperkalemia and acute kidney injury compared with the monotherapy group. In general, avoid combined use of RAS inhibitors. Monitor blood pressure, renal function, and electrolytes in patients on lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets and other agents that affect the RAS. Do not coadminister aliskiren with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets in patients with diabetes. Avoid use of aliskiren with PRINZIDE in patients with renal impairment (GFR <60 ml/min). Other Agents: Lisinopril has been used concomitantly w
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Clinical Pharmacology
- CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY Lisinopril-Hydrochlorothiazide As a result of its diuretic effects, hydrochlorothiazide increases plasma renin activity, increases aldosterone secretion, and decreases serum potassium. Administration of lisinopril blocks the renin-angiotensin aldosterone axis and tends to reverse the potassium loss associated with the diuretic. In clinical studies, the extent of blood pressure reduction seen with the combination of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide was approximately additive. The lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 10-12.5 combination worked equally well in Black and Caucasian patients. The lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-12.5 and lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-25 combinations appeared somewhat less effective in Black patients, but relatively few Black patients were studied. In most patients, the antihypertensive effect of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets was sustained for at least 24 hours. In a randomized, controlled comparison, the mean antihypertensive effects of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-12.5 and lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-25 were similar, suggesting that many patients who respond adequately to the latter combination may be controlled with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets 20-12.5. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION .) Concomitant administration of lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide has little or no effect on the bioavailability of either drug. The combination tablet is bioequivalent to concomitant administration of the separate entities. Lisinopril Mechanism of Action Lisinopril inhibits angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in human subjects and animals. ACE is a peptidyl dipeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictor substance, angiotensin II. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone secretion by the adrenal cortex. Inhibition of ACE results in decreased plasma angiotensin II which leads to decreased vasopressor activity and to decreased aldosterone secretion. The latter decrease may result in a small increase of serum potassium. Removal of angiotensin II negative feedback on renin secretion leads to increased plasma renin activity. In hypertensive patients with normal renal function treated with lisinopril alone for up to 24 weeks, the mean increase in serum potassium was less than 0.1 mEq/L; however, approximately 15 percent of patients had increases greater than 0.5 mEq/L and approximately six percent had a decrease greater than 0.5 mEq/L. In the same study, patients treated with lisinopril plus a thiazide diuretic showed essentially no change in serum potassium. (See PRECAUTIONS .) ACE is identical to kininase, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin. Whether increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in the therapeutic effects of lisinopril remains to be elucidated. While the mechanism through which lisinopril lowers blood pressure is believed to be primarily s
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Mechanism of Action
- Mechanism of Action Lisinopril inhibits angiotensin-converting enzyme (ACE) in human subjects and animals. ACE is a peptidyl dipeptidase that catalyzes the conversion of angiotensin I to the vasoconstrictor substance, angiotensin II. Angiotensin II also stimulates aldosterone secretion by the adrenal cortex. Inhibition of ACE results in decreased plasma angiotensin II which leads to decreased vasopressor activity and to decreased aldosterone secretion. The latter decrease may result in a small increase of serum potassium. Removal of angiotensin II negative feedback on renin secretion leads to increased plasma renin activity. In hypertensive patients with normal renal function treated with lisinopril alone for up to 24 weeks, the mean increase in serum potassium was less than 0.1 mEq/L; however, approximately 15 percent of patients had increases greater than 0.5 mEq/L and approximately six percent had a decrease greater than 0.5 mEq/L. In the same study, patients treated with lisinopril plus a thiazide diuretic showed essentially no change in serum potassium. (See PRECAUTIONS .) ACE is identical to kininase, an enzyme that degrades bradykinin. Whether increased levels of bradykinin, a potent vasodepressor peptide, play a role in the therapeutic effects of lisinopril remains to be elucidated. While the mechanism through which lisinopril lowers blood pressure is believed to be primarily suppression of the renin-angiotensin-aldosterone system, lisinopril is antihypertensive even in patients with low-renin hypertension. Although lisinopril was antihypertensive in all races studied, Black hypertensive patients (usually a low-renin hypertensive population) had a smaller average response to lisinopril monotherapy than non-Black patients.

## Pharmacodynamics
- Pharmacodynamics Administration of lisinopril to patients with hypertension results in a reduction of supine and standing blood pressure to about the same extent with no compensatory tachycardia. Symptomatic postural hypotension is usually not observed although it can occur and should be anticipated in volume and/or salt-depleted patients. (See WARNINGS .) In most patients studied, onset of antihypertensive activity was seen at one hour after oral administration of an individual dose of lisinopril, with peak reduction of blood pressure achieved by six hours. In some patients achievement of optimal blood pressure reduction may require two to four weeks of therapy. At recommended single daily doses, antihypertensive effects have been maintained for at least 24 hours, after dosing, although the effect at 24 hours was substantially smaller than the effect six hours after dosing. The antihypertensive effects of lisinopril have continued during long-term therapy. Abrupt withdrawal of lisinopril has not been associated with a rapid increase in blood pressure; nor with a significant overshoot of pretreatment blood pressure. In hemodynamic studies in patients with essential hypertension, blood pressure reduction was accompanied by a reduction in peripheral arterial resistance with little or no change in cardiac output and in heart rate. In a study in nine hypertensive patients, following administration of lisinopril, there was an increase in mean renal blood flow that was not significant. Data from several small studies are inconsistent with respect to the effect of lisinopril on glomerular filtration rate in hypertensive patients with normal renal function, but suggest that changes, if any, are not large. In patients with renovascular hypertension lisinopril has been shown to be well tolerated and effective in controlling blood pressure (see PRECAUTIONS ).

## Pharmacokinetics
- Pharmacokinetics and Metabolism Following oral administration of lisinopril, peak serum concentrations occur within about 7 hours. Declining serum concentrations exhibit a prolonged terminal phase which does not contribute to drug accumulation. This terminal phase probably represents saturable binding to ACE and is not proportional to dose. Lisinopril does not appear to be bound to other serum proteins. Lisinopril does not undergo metabolism and is excreted unchanged entirely in the urine. Based on urinary recovery, the mean extent of absorption of lisinopril is approximately 25 percent, with large intersubject variability (6% to 60%) at all doses tested (5 mg to 80 mg). Lisinopril absorption is not influenced by the presence of food in the gastrointestinal tract. Upon multiple dosing, lisinopril exhibits an effective half-life of accumulation of 12 hours. Impaired renal function decreases elimination of lisinopril, which is excreted principally through the kidneys, but this decrease becomes clinically important only when the glomerular filtration rate is below 30 mL/min. Above this glomerular filtration rate, the elimination half-life is little changed. With greater impairment, however, peak and trough lisinopril levels increase, time to peak concentration increases and time to attain steady state is prolonged. Older patients, on average, have (approximately doubled) higher blood levels and area under the plasma concentration time curve (AUC) than younger patients. (See DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION ) Lisinopril can be removed by hemodialysis. Studies in rats indicate that lisinopril crosses the blood-brain barrier poorly. Multiple doses of lisinopril in rats do not result in accumulation in any tissues. However, milk of lactating rats contains radioactivity following administration of 14 C lisinopril. By whole body autoradiography, radioactivity was found in the placenta following administration of labeled drug to pregnant rats, but none was found in the fetuses.

## Overdosage
- OVERDOSAGE No specific information is available on the treatment of overdosage with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets. Treatment is symptomatic and supportive. Therapy with lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets should be discontinued and the patient observed closely. Suggested measures include induction of emesis and/or gastric lavage, and correction of dehydration, electrolyte imbalance and hypotension by established procedures. Lisinopril Following a single oral dose of 20 g/kg no lethality occurred in rats and death occurred in one of 20 mice receiving the same dose. The most likely manifestation of overdosage would be hypotension, for which the usual treatment would be intravenous infusion of normal saline solution. Lisinopril can be removed by hemodialysis (see WARNINGS, Anaphylactoid reaction during membrane exposure ). Hydrochlorothiazide Oral administration of a single oral dose of 10 g/kg to mice and rats was not lethal. The most common signs and symptoms observed are those caused by electrolyte depletion (hypokalemia, hypochloremia, hyponatremia) and dehydration resulting from excessive diuresis. If digitalis has also been administered, hypokalemia may accentuate cardiac arrhythmias.

## Boxed Warning
- WARNING: FETAL TOXICITY When pregnancy is detected, discontinue lisinopril and hydrochlorothiazide tablets as soon as possible. Drugs that act directly on the renin-angiotensin system can cause injury and death to the developing fetus. See Warnings, Fetal Toxicity .
