# DRUG: Metformin

## Identification
- Generic Name: SITAGLIPTIN AND METFORMIN HYDROCHLORIDE
- Brand Names: ZITUVIMET
- Manufacturer: Zydus Lifesciences Limited
- Route: ORAL
- Pharmacological Class: Dipeptidyl Peptidase 4 Inhibitor [EPC]

## Indications and Usage
- 1 INDICATIONS AND USAGE ZITUVIMET is a combination of sitagliptin, a dipeptidyl peptidase-4 (DPP-4) inhibitor, and metformin hydrochloride (HCl), a biguanide, indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. ( 1 ) Limitations of Use: ZITUVIMET is not recommended in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. ( 1 ) ZITUVIMET has not been studied in patients with a history of pancreatitis. ( 1 ) ZITUVIMET is indicated as an adjunct to diet and exercise to improve glycemic control in adults with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Limitations of Use ZITUVIMET is not recommended in patients with type 1 diabetes mellitus. ZITUVIMET has not been studied in patients with a history of pancreatitis. It is unknown whether patients with a history of pancreatitis are at increased risk for the development of pancreatitis while using ZITUVIMET. [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 )].

## Dosage and Administration
- 2 DOSAGE AND ADMINISTRATION Take ZITUVIMET orally twice daily with meals. ( 2.1 ) Individualize the dosage of ZITUVIMET on the basis of the patient's current regimen, effectiveness, and tolerability. ( 2.1 ) The maximum recommended daily dose is 100 mg of sitagliptin and 2,000 mg of metformin HCl. ( 2.1 ) The recommended starting dose in patients not currently treated with metformin is 50 mg sitagliptin and 500 mg metformin HCl twice daily, with gradual dose escalation recommended to reduce gastrointestinal side effects associated with metformin. ( 2.1 ) The starting dose in patients already treated with metformin should provide sitagliptin dosed as 50 mg twice daily (100 mg total daily dose) and the dose of metformin already being taken. For patients taking metformin HCl 850 mg twice daily, the recommended starting dose of ZITUVIMET is 50 mg sitagliptin and 1,000 mg metformin HCl twice daily. ( 2.1 ) Prior to initiation, assess renal function with estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) ( 2.2 ) ○ Do not use in patients with eGFR below 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ○ ZITUVIMET is not recommended in patients with eGFR between 30 and less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m 2 . ZITUVIMET may need to be discontinued at time of, or prior to, iodinated contrast imaging procedures. ( 2.3 ) 2.1 Recommended Dosage Take ZITUVIMET orally twice daily with meals. Individualize the dosage of ZITUVIMET on the basis of the patient's current regimen, effectiveness, and tolerability. The maximum recommended daily dose is 100 mg of sitagliptin and 2,000 mg of metformin hydrochloride (HCl). Do not split or divide ZITUVIMET tablets. The recommended starting dose in patients not currently treated with metformin is 50 mg sitagliptin and 500 mg metformin HCl twice daily, with gradual dose escalation recommended to reduce gastrointestinal side effects associated with metformin. The starting dose in patients already treated with metformin should provide sitagliptin dosed as 50 mg twice daily (100 mg total daily dose) and the dose of metformin already being taken. For patients taking metformin HCl 850 mg twice daily, the recommended starting dose of ZITUVIMET is 50 mg sitagliptin and 1,000 mg metformin HCl twice daily. 2.2 Recommendations for Use in Renal Impairment Assess renal function prior to initiation of ZITUVIMET and periodically thereafter. ZITUVIMET is contraindicated in patients with an estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) below 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 [see Contraindications ( 4 ) and Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )]. ZITUVIMET is not recommended in patients with an eGFR between 30 and less than 45 mL/min/1.73 m 2 because these patients require a lower dosage of sitagliptin than what is available in the fixed combination ZITUVIMET product. 2.3 Discontinuation for Iodinated Contrast Imaging Procedures Discontinue ZITUVIMET at the time of, or prior to, an iodinated contrast imaging procedure in patients with an eGFR between 30 and 60 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ; in patients with a history of
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Dosage Forms and Strengths
- 3 DOSAGE FORMS AND STRENGTHS ZITUVIMET Tablets: • sitagliptin 50 mg and metformin HCl 500 mg tablets • sitagliptin 50 mg and metformin HCl 1,000 mg tablets ( 3 ) Tablets: sitagliptin 50 mg and metformin HCl 500 mg tablets are white to off-white, oval shaped, biconvex, film coated tablets debossed with "1786" on one side and plain on the other side. sitagliptin 50 mg and metformin HCl 1,000 mg tablets are reddish brown, oval shaped, biconvex, film coated tablets debossed with "1787" on one side and plain on the other side.

## Contraindications
- 4 CONTRAINDICATIONS Severe renal impairment: (eGFR below 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) ( 4) Metabolic acidosis, including diabetic ketoacidosis. ( 4 ) History of a serious hypersensitivity reaction to ZITUVIMET, sitagliptin, or metformin, such as anaphylaxis or angioedema. (4) ZITUVIMET is contraindicated in patients with: Severe renal impairment (eGFR below 30 mL/min/1.73 m 2 ) [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )]. Acute or chronic metabolic acidosis, including diabetic ketoacidosis. History of a serious hypersensitivity reaction to sitagliptin, metformin, or any of the excipients in ZITUVIMET. Serious hypersensitivity reactions including anaphylaxis or angioedema have been reported. [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.7 ) and Adverse Reactions ( 6.2 )].

## Adverse Reactions
- 6 ADVERSE REACTIONS The following adverse reactions are also discussed elsewhere in the prescribing information: Lactic Acidosis [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )] Pancreatitis [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.2 )] Heart Failure [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.3 )] Acute Renal Failure [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.4 )] Vitamin B12 Deficiency [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.5 )] Hypoglycemia with Concomitant Use with Insulin or Insulin Secretagogues [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.6 )] Hypersensitivity Reactions [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.7 )] Severe and Disabling Arthralgia [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.8 )] Bullous Pemphigoid [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.9 )] Most common adverse reactions (incidence ≥5% of patients simultaneously started on sitagliptin and metformin and more commonly than in patients treated with placebo were diarrhea, upper respiratory tract infection, and headache. ( 6.1 ) To report SUSPECTED ADVERSE REACTIONS, contact Zydus Pharmaceuticals (USA) Inc. at 1-877-993-8779 or FDA at 1-800-FDA-1088 or www.fda.gov/medwatch. 6.1 Clinical Trials Experience Because clinical trials are conducted under widely varying conditions, adverse reaction rates observed in the clinical trials of a drug cannot be directly compared to rates in the clinical trials of another drug and may not reflect the rates observed in practice. Common Adverse Reactions Sitagliptin and Metformin Coadministration in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Inadequately Controlled on Diet and Exercise Table 1 summarizes the most common (≥5% of patients) adverse reactions reported in a 24-week placebo-controlled factorial trial in which sitagliptin and metformin were coadministered to patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus inadequately controlled on diet and exercise. Table 1: Sitagliptin and Metformin Coadministered to Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Inadequately Controlled on Diet and Exercise: Adverse Reactions Reported in ≥5% of Patients Receiving Combination Therapy (and Greater than in Patients Receiving Placebo) Intent-to-treat population. Number of Patients (%) Placebo Sitagliptin 100 mg once daily Metformin HCl 500 mg/ Metformin HCl 1,000 mg twice daily Data pooled for the patients given the lower and higher doses of metformin. Sitagliptin 50 mg twice daily + Metformin HCl 500 mg/ Metformin HCl 1,000 mg twice daily N = 176 N = 179 N = 364 N = 372 Diarrhea 7 (4) 5 (2.8) 28 (7.7) 28 (7.5) Upper Respiratory Tract Infection 9 (5.1) 8 (4.5) 19 (5.2) 23 (6.2) Headache 5 (2.8) 2 (1.1) 14 (3.8) 22 (5.9) Sitagliptin Add-on Therapy in Patients with Type 2 Diabetes Mellitus Inadequately Controlled on Metformin Alone In a 24-week placebo-controlled trial of sitagliptin 100 mg administered once daily added to a twice daily metformin regimen, there were no adverse reactions in ≥5% of patients and more commonly than in patients given placebo. Discontinuation of therapy due to clinical adverse reactions was similar to the placebo treatment
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Drug Interactions
- 7 DRUG INTERACTIONS Table 4 presents clinically significant drug interactions with ZITUVIMET: Table 4: Clinically Significant Drug Interactions with ZITUVIMET Carbonic Anhydrase Inhibitors Clinical Impact: Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors frequently cause a decrease in serum bicarbonate and induce non-anion gap, hyperchloremic metabolic acidosis. Concomitant use of these drugs with ZITUVIMET may increase the risk for lactic acidosis. Intervention: Consider more frequent monitoring of these patients. Examples: Topiramate, zonisamide, acetazolamide or dichlorphenamide. Drugs that Reduce Metformin Clearance Clinical Impact: Concomitant use of drugs that interfere with common renal tubular transport systems involved in the renal elimination of metformin (e.g., organic cationic transporter-2 [OCT 2 ] / multidrug and toxin extrusion [MATE] inhibitors) could increase systemic exposure to metformin and may increase the risk for lactic acidosis [see Clinical Pharmacology ( 12.3 )]. Intervention: Consider the benefits and risks of concomitant use with ZITUVIMET. Examples: Ranolazine, vandetanib, dolutegravir, and cimetidine. Alcohol Clinical Impact: Alcohol is known to potentiate the effect of metformin on lactate metabolism. Intervention: Warn patients against alcohol intake while receiving ZITUVIMET. Insulin Secretagogues or Insulin Clinical Impact: Coadministration of ZITUVIMET with an insulin secretagogue (e.g., sulfonylurea) or insulin may increase the risk of hypoglycemia. Intervention: Patients receiving an insulin secretagogue or insulin may require lower doses of the insulin secretagogue or insulin. Drugs Affecting Glycemic Control Clinical Impact: Certain drugs tend to produce hyperglycemia and may lead to loss of glycemic control. Intervention: When such drugs are administered to a patient receiving ZITUVIMET, observe the patient closely for loss of blood glucose control. When such drugs are withdrawn from a patient receiving ZITUVIMET, observe the patient closely for hypoglycemia. Examples: Thiazides and other diuretics, corticosteroids, phenothiazines, thyroid products, estrogens, oral contraceptives, phenytoin, nicotinic acid, sympathomimetics, calcium channel blockers, and isoniazid. Carbonic anhydrase inhibitors may increase risk of lactic acidosis. Consider more frequent monitoring. ( 7 ) Drugs that reduce metformin clearance (such as ranolazine, vandetanib, dolutegravir, and cimetidine) may increase the accumulation of metformin. Consider the benefits and risks of concomitant use. ( 7 ) Alcohol can potentiate the effect of metformin on lactate metabolism. Warn patients against excessive alcohol intake. ( 7 )

## Use in Specific Populations
- 8 USE IN SPECIFIC POPULATIONS Females and Males of Reproductive Potential: Advise premenopausal females of the potential for an unintended pregnancy. ( 8.3 ) Geriatric Use: Assess renal function more frequently. ( 8.5 ) Hepatic Impairment: Avoid use in patients with hepatic impairment. ( 8.7 ) 8.1 Pregnancy Risk Summary Available data with ZITUVIMET and sitagliptin use in pregnant women are not sufficient to inform a ZITUVIMET-associated or sitagliptin-associated risk for major birth defects and miscarriage. Published studies with metformin use during pregnancy have not reported a clear association with metformin and major birth defect or miscarriage risk [see Data]. There are risks to the mother and fetus associated with poorly controlled diabetes in pregnancy [see Clinical Considerations]. No adverse developmental effects were observed when sitagliptin was administered to pregnant rats and rabbits during organogenesis at oral doses up to 30-times and 20-times, respectively, the 100 mg clinical dose, based on AUC. No adverse developmental effects were observed when metformin was administered to pregnant Sprague Dawley rats and rabbits during organogenesis at doses up to 2- and 6-times, respectively, a 2,000 mg clinical dose, based on body surface area [see Data]. The estimated background risk of major birth defects is 6 to 10% in women with pre-gestational diabetes with a hemoglobin A1c (A1C) >7% and has been reported to be as high as 20% to 25% in women with a A1C >10%. In the U.S. general population, the estimated background risk of major birth defects and miscarriage in clinically recognized pregnancies is 2% to 4% and 15% to 20% respectively. Clinical Considerations Disease-Associated Maternal and/or Embryo/Fetal Risk Poorly controlled diabetes in pregnancy increases the maternal risk for diabetic ketoacidosis, preeclampsia, spontaneous abortions, preterm delivery, and delivery complications. Poorly controlled diabetes increases the fetal risk for major birth defects, still birth, and macrosomia related morbidity. Data Human Data Published data from post-marketing studies do not report a clear association with metformin and major birth defects, miscarriage, or adverse maternal or fetal outcomes when metformin is used during pregnancy. However, these studies cannot definitely establish the absence of any risk because of methodological limitations, including small sample size and inconsistent comparator groups. Animal Data Sitagliptin and Metformin No animal reproduction studies were conducted with the coadministration of sitagliptin and metformin. Sitagliptin In embryo-fetal development studies, sitagliptin administered to pregnant rats and rabbits during organogenesis (gestation day 6 to 20) did not adversely affect developmental outcomes at oral doses up to 250 mg/kg (30-times the 100 mg clinical dose) and 125 mg/kg (20-times the 100 mg clinical dose), respectively, based on AUC. Higher doses in rats associated with maternal toxicity increa
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Clinical Pharmacology
- 12 CLINICAL PHARMACOLOGY 12.1 Mechanism of Action ZITUVIMET ZITUVIMET combines two antihyperglycemic agents with complementary mechanisms of action to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: sitagliptin, a DPP- 4 inhibitor, and metformin HCl, a member of the biguanide class. Sitagliptin Sitagliptin is a DPP-4 inhibitor, which is believed to exert its actions in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus by slowing the inactivation of incretin hormones. Concentrations of the active intact hormones are increased by sitagliptin, thereby increasing and prolonging the action of these hormones. Incretin hormones, including glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), are released by the intestine throughout the day, and levels are increased in response to a meal. These hormones are rapidly inactivated by the enzyme DPP-4. The incretins are part of an endogenous system involved in the physiologic regulation of glucose homeostasis. When blood glucose concentrations are normal or elevated, GLP-1 and GIP increase insulin synthesis and release from pancreatic beta cells by intracellular signaling pathways involving cyclic AMP. GLP-1 also lowers glucagon secretion from pancreatic alpha cells, leading to reduced hepatic glucose production. By increasing and prolonging active incretin levels, sitagliptin increases insulin release and decreases glucagon levels in the circulation in a glucose-dependent manner. Sitagliptin demonstrates selectivity for DPP-4 and does not inhibit DPP-8 or DPP-9 activity in vitro at concentrations approximating those from therapeutic doses. Metformin Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may decrease. 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Sitagliptin In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, administration of sitagliptin led to inhibition of DPP-4 enzyme activity for a 24-hour period. After an oral glucose load or a meal, this DPP-4 inhibition resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in circulating levels of active GLP-1 and GIP, decreased glucagon concentrations, and increased responsiveness of insulin release to glucose, resulting in higher C-peptide and insulin concentrations. The rise in insulin with the decrease in glucagon was associated with lower fasting glucose concentrations and reduced glucose excursion following an oral glucose load or a meal. In studies with healthy subjects, sitagliptin did not lower blood glucose or cause hypoglycemia. Sitagliptin and Metformin Coadministration In a two-day study in healthy subjects, sitagliptin alone increa
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Mechanism of Action
- 12.1 Mechanism of Action ZITUVIMET ZITUVIMET combines two antihyperglycemic agents with complementary mechanisms of action to improve glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus: sitagliptin, a DPP- 4 inhibitor, and metformin HCl, a member of the biguanide class. Sitagliptin Sitagliptin is a DPP-4 inhibitor, which is believed to exert its actions in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus by slowing the inactivation of incretin hormones. Concentrations of the active intact hormones are increased by sitagliptin, thereby increasing and prolonging the action of these hormones. Incretin hormones, including glucagon-like peptide-1 (GLP-1) and glucose-dependent insulinotropic polypeptide (GIP), are released by the intestine throughout the day, and levels are increased in response to a meal. These hormones are rapidly inactivated by the enzyme DPP-4. The incretins are part of an endogenous system involved in the physiologic regulation of glucose homeostasis. When blood glucose concentrations are normal or elevated, GLP-1 and GIP increase insulin synthesis and release from pancreatic beta cells by intracellular signaling pathways involving cyclic AMP. GLP-1 also lowers glucagon secretion from pancreatic alpha cells, leading to reduced hepatic glucose production. By increasing and prolonging active incretin levels, sitagliptin increases insulin release and decreases glucagon levels in the circulation in a glucose-dependent manner. Sitagliptin demonstrates selectivity for DPP-4 and does not inhibit DPP-8 or DPP-9 activity in vitro at concentrations approximating those from therapeutic doses. Metformin Metformin is an antihyperglycemic agent which improves glucose tolerance in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, lowering both basal and postprandial plasma glucose. Metformin decreases hepatic glucose production, decreases intestinal absorption of glucose, and improves insulin sensitivity by increasing peripheral glucose uptake and utilization. With metformin therapy, insulin secretion remains unchanged while fasting insulin levels and day-long plasma insulin response may decrease.

## Pharmacodynamics
- 12.2 Pharmacodynamics Sitagliptin In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus, administration of sitagliptin led to inhibition of DPP-4 enzyme activity for a 24-hour period. After an oral glucose load or a meal, this DPP-4 inhibition resulted in a 2- to 3-fold increase in circulating levels of active GLP-1 and GIP, decreased glucagon concentrations, and increased responsiveness of insulin release to glucose, resulting in higher C-peptide and insulin concentrations. The rise in insulin with the decrease in glucagon was associated with lower fasting glucose concentrations and reduced glucose excursion following an oral glucose load or a meal. In studies with healthy subjects, sitagliptin did not lower blood glucose or cause hypoglycemia. Sitagliptin and Metformin Coadministration In a two-day study in healthy subjects, sitagliptin alone increased active GLP-1 concentrations, whereas metformin alone increased active and total GLP-1 concentrations to similar extents. Coadministration of sitagliptin and metformin had an additive effect on active GLP-1 concentrations. Sitagliptin, but not metformin, increased active GIP concentrations. It is unclear what these findings mean for changes in glycemic control in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Cardiac Electrophysiology In a randomized, placebo-controlled crossover study, 79 healthy subjects were administered a single oral dose of sitagliptin 100 mg, sitagliptin 800 mg (8 times the recommended dose), and placebo. At the recommended dose of 100 mg, there was no effect on the QTc interval obtained at the peak plasma concentration, or at any other time during the study. Following the 800-mg dose, the maximum increase in the placebo-corrected mean change in QTc from baseline at 3 hours postdose was 8.0 msec. This increase is not considered to be clinically significant. At the 800-mg dose, peak sitagliptin plasma concentrations were approximately 11 times higher than the peak concentrations following a 100-mg dose. In patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus administered sitagliptin 100 mg (N=81) or sitagliptin 200 mg (N=63) daily, there were no meaningful changes in QTc interval based on ECG data obtained at the time of expected peak plasma concentration.

## Pharmacokinetics
- 12.3 Pharmacokinetics Sitagliptin The pharmacokinetics of sitagliptin have been extensively characterized in healthy subjects and patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Following a single oral 100-mg dose to healthy volunteers, mean plasma AUC of sitagliptin was 8.52 µM•hr, C max was 950 nM, and apparent terminal half-life (t 1/2 ) was 12.4 hours. Plasma AUC of sitagliptin increased in a dose-proportional manner and increased approximately 14% following 100 mg doses at steady-state compared to the first dose. The intra-subject and inter-subject coefficients of variation for sitagliptin AUC were small (5.8% and 15.1%). The pharmacokinetics of sitagliptin was generally similar in healthy subjects and in patients with type 2 diabetes mellitus. Absorption Sitagliptin After oral administration of a 100 mg dose to healthy subjects, sitagliptin was rapidly absorbed with peak plasma concentrations (median T max ) occurring 1 to 4 hours postdose. The absolute bioavailability of sitagliptin is approximately 87%. Effect of Food Coadministration of a high-fat meal with sitagliptin had no effect on the pharmacokinetics of sitagliptin. Metformin The absolute bioavailability of a metformin HCl 500-mg tablet given under fasting conditions is approximately 50% to 60%. Studies using single oral doses of metformin HCl tablets 500 mg to 1,500 mg, and 850 mg to 2,550 mg (approximately 1.3 times the maximum recommended daily dosage), indicate that there is a lack of dose proportionality with increasing doses, which is due to decreased absorption rather than an alteration in elimination. Effect of Food Food decreases the extent of and slightly delays the absorption of metformin, as shown by approximately a 40% lower mean peak plasma concentration (C max ), a 25% lower area under the plasma concentration versus time curve (AUC), and a 35-minute prolongation of time to peak plasma concentration (T max ) following administration of a single 850-mg tablet of metformin HCl with food, compared to the same tablet strength administered fasting. The clinical relevance of these decreases is unknown. Distribution Sitagliptin The mean volume of distribution at steady state following a single 100-mg intravenous dose of sitagliptin to healthy subjects is approximately 198 liters. The fraction of sitagliptin reversibly bound to plasma proteins is low (38%). Metformin The apparent volume of distribution (V/F) of metformin following single oral doses of metformin HCl tablets 850 mg averaged 654 ± 358 L. Metformin is negligibly bound to plasma proteins, in contrast to sulfonylureas, which are more than 90% protein bound. Metformin partitions into erythrocytes, most likely as a function of time. At usual clinical doses and dosing schedules of metformin HCl tablets, steady-state plasma concentrations of metformin are reached within 24 to 48 hours and are generally <1 mcg/mL. Elimination Sitagliptin Approximately 79% of sitagliptin is excreted unchanged in the urine with metabolism being
- [... truncated for brevity ...]

## Overdosage
- 10 OVERDOSAGE In the event of overdose with ZITUVIMET, consider contacting the Poison Help Line (1-800-222-1222) or a medical toxicologist for additional overdosage management recommendations. Employ the usual supportive measures dictated by the patient's clinical status. Per clinical judgement, consider removal of unabsorbed material from the gastrointestinal tract, and clinical monitoring (including obtaining an ECG). Sitagliptin is modestly dialyzable. In clinical studies, approximately 13.5% of the dose was removed over a 3- to 4-hour hemodialysis session. Prolonged hemodialysis may be considered if clinically appropriate. It is not known if sitagliptin is dialyzable by peritoneal dialysis. Overdose of metformin has occurred, including ingestion of amounts greater than 50 grams. Hypoglycemia was reported in approximately 10% of cases, but no causal association with metformin has been established. Lactic acidosis has been reported in approximately 32% of metformin overdose cases [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )]. Metformin is dialyzable with a clearance of up to 170 mL/min under good hemodynamic conditions. Therefore, hemodialysis may be useful for removal of accumulated drug from patients in whom metformin overdosage is suspected.

## Boxed Warning
- WARNING: LACTIC ACIDOSIS WARNING: LACTIC ACIDOSIS See full prescribing information for complete boxed warning . Postmarketing cases of metformin-associated lactic acidosis have resulted in death, hypothermia, hypotension, and resistant bradyarrhythmias. Symptoms included malaise, myalgias, respiratory distress, somnolence, and abdominal pain. Laboratory abnormalities included elevated blood lactate levels, anion gap acidosis, increased lactate/pyruvate ratio, and metformin plasma levels generally >5 mcg/mL. ( 5.1 ) Risk factors include renal impairment, concomitant use of certain drugs, age ≥65 years old, radiological studies with contrast, surgery and other procedures, hypoxic states, excessive alcohol intake, and hepatic impairment. Steps to reduce the risk of and manage metformin-associated lactic acidosis in these high-risk groups are provided in the Full Prescribing Information. ( 5.1 ) If lactic acidosis is suspected, discontinue ZITUVIMET and institute general supportive measures in a hospital setting. Prompt hemodialysis is recommended. ( 5.1 ) Postmarketing cases of metformin-associated lactic acidosis have resulted in death, hypothermia, hypotension, and resistant bradyarrhythmias. The onset of metformin-associated lactic acidosis is often subtle, accompanied only by nonspecific symptoms such as malaise, myalgias, respiratory distress, somnolence, and abdominal pain. Metformin-associated lactic acidosis was characterized by elevated blood lactate levels (>5 mmol/Liter), anion gap acidosis (without evidence of ketonuria or ketonemia), an increased lactate/pyruvate ratio, and metformin plasma levels generally >5 mcg/mL [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )] . Risk factors for metformin-associated lactic acidosis include renal impairment, concomitant use of certain drugs (e.g., carbonic anhydrase inhibitors such as topiramate), age 65 years old or greater, having a radiological study with contrast, surgery and other procedures, hypoxic states (e.g., acute congestive heart failure), excessive alcohol intake, and hepatic impairment. Steps to reduce the risk of and manage metformin-associated lactic acidosis in these high risk groups are provided in the full prescribing information [see Dosage and Administration ( 2.2 )>, Contraindications ( 4 ), Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 ), Drug Interactions ( 7 ), and Use in Specific Populations ( 8.6 , 8.7 )] . If metformin-associated lactic acidosis is suspected, immediately discontinue ZITUVIMET and institute general supportive measures in a hospital setting. Prompt hemodialysis is recommended [see Warnings and Precautions ( 5.1 )] .
